Now, to take a look at GitHub Actions
in well, action, I'm back here on GitHub
in one of these dummy accounts I created
in the crash course section,
but of course, any GitHub account will do.
I just wanna note that this is a GitHub account
that uses the free plan.
So everything I'm showing to you here works
in that free plan.
Now, to get started with actions,
I'll create a new GitHub repository.
And I'll name this gh-first-action.
The name, of course, is totally up to
and does not matter.
I'll also keep this as a public repository.
And I will indeed add a README file here
so that we have some content
in this repository right from the start
because I will not connect this repository
to some existing local Git repository.
Instead for this first action, we'll stay on GitHub.
We will soon switch to a local repository again
and connect that to GitHub but for this start,
we'll stick to this GitHub-only repository.
So I'll create this repository.
And once it's done, we land on a screen
that should look something like this
with this dummy README file.
And we could, of course, now clone this
to work on it locally but we won't do this here.
Instead, we wanna get started with our first action,
and we can do so by clicking on this Actions tab here.
This is the place where you can view
and also create actions that belong to this repository.
Though actually it would be more correct
to say that here you can create your workflows
that belong to this repository.
I'm currently also using the word action as a synonym
for workflow, and for the moment, that's fine
but as you will learn later in this course,
and in this section also already,
there's a separate feature called action.
So what we're creating here
is actually a workflow and that's also what I mentioned
on the slide earlier.
You have these three main building blocks:
workflows, jobs and steps,
and it's a workflow that's attached to a repository.
And that's what we're doing here.
And indeed to get started,
we can choose this simple workflow template here
and click on Configure.
Alternatively, we also can get started
with one of the many other templates
that perform certain tasks.
And doing so can definitely also be interesting
to see some more complex action definitions,
though of course, throughout this course,
you will learn how to build more complex action workflows.
For this start, we'll start with this simple workflow.
Now, what this does is it gives us an editor
in the browser.
You can also create actions locally,
and we'll do that later, but for the moment,
we'll stick to this browser editor.
And here we have to give this file a name.
That's the first thing we should do
and I'll name it first-action.
Please also note the path where this file will be stored.
As you can see, it's actually stored
in the repository and then in a .github folder.
There in a workflows subfolder
and then in a YAML file.
That's what .yml stands for.
It's a YAML file and YAML is simply a way
of formatting text.
And this is indeed where you should store
your GitHub Action workflows
so that GitHub is able to detect them.
You must store them in a .github folder
in a workflows subfolder and then in such a YAML file.
So that's the file name and location.
Down here we have the content of the file.
And we get some annotations here
for this basic workflow that was created
but I will actually delete all of that
and write it with you together from scratch
so that we fully understand
how such a action is configured and created.
And it all starts with giving your action a name.
You do this in this YAML file
by adding the name key here in the first line,
and then a colon.
And this must be name.
So this key here must be named name,
and then after the colon, you specify your workflow name.
And I'll name its First Workflow.
Now, keep in mind,
you can have as many workflows as you want
by adding multiple YAML files in this workflows folder
but here in this first file,
this is the name of this workflow.
Now, after giving this workflow a name,
you have to also define
when this workflow should be executed.
And you do this by adding the on key.
The on key is just like name,
a reserved keyword or name
for which GitHub Actions will be looking.
And after on, you define the event or the events
that should trigger this workflow to run.
Now, we'll see multiple events in action later.
For the moment, you can just add one event
by writing workflow_dispatch here.
Now, GitHub Actions defines many events
to which you can listen
and I'll get back to an overview
of the available events later.
This specific event here, workflow_dispatch,
makes sure that we can manually trigger this workflow.
So it's an event that waits for the user
to manually start this workflow.
Of course, there also are many events
that will automatically start the workflow,
and we'll take a look at those very soon.
So now we have a name
and we have our trigger.
What's missing is the work that should be done.
And for this, we define jobs with the jobs key.
And it's important that this must be jobs, not job.
It has to be jobs.
Now, jobs does not take a value immediately,
as we had it for name or on,
instead you move to a new line
and hit the Tab key on your keyboard
because YAML, this format, works with indentation.
And if you indent a field below another field,
then it belongs to that field.
And jobs needs a field that belongs to it
and that is simply the first job you wanna define.
Now you give that job a name.
For example, first-job.
This here is totally up to you.
It can be first-job or firstjob like this
or basic, whatever you want.
I'll stick to first-job.
Now, this then also doesn't take a value directly.
Instead, you move to a new line and hit Tab again
because just like the jobs field here,
the job definition field,
which we created here with an identifier
of our choice also needs a couple
of related fields that define some details about this job.
So here we're saying that we have a bunch of jobs.
Then we create a first-job with an identifier
of our choice.
And now for this first-job,
we first of all have to define the runner
on which the job will execute the different steps.
So the environment
in which the different steps should be executed.
And this is defined by adding the runs-on key, like this.
This again is a reserved name now.
So the only identifier that's not reserved thus far
is this job name.
All other identifiers, like name, on, jobs and runs-on
are reserved and have to be written like this.
Now here we then define the environment we wanna use
and GitHub Actions provides multiple environments
we can use.
If you search for GitHub Actions runners,
you will find an overview
of the runners you can use,
some details about that,
and also, if you scroll down,
a list of the runners currently supported
by GitHub Actions.
Now, obviously that list will change over time
but at the moment I'm recording this,
you get various Windows Server environments,
various Ubuntu environments we can use
and various macOS environments we can use.
And you see the identifiers you have to use
in your script or in your workflow definition here
in this middle column.
And in my case here, I'm using ubuntu-latest,
which at the time I'm recording this
will lead to this Ubuntu version
to be installed on that hosting machine.
You see the hardware specifications
of that hosting machine up here
where you see the specification
for Windows and Linux machines
and for macOS machines.
And this is all predefined by GitHub.
So here I will ubuntu-latest
to use this Linux runner
on that given hardware specification.
And as a next step,
we have to define the steps that should be executed
with the steps key.
Again, this is a reserved name
and now we move to a new line and indent again,
and now we add a list of steps.
And that list is added slightly differently
than we added keys before
because now we have to add a dash here
and then thereafter again a couple
of key-value pairs that describe this step.
And multiple steps get multiple dashes.
Now, that first step takes a name.
And you should give your steps names
to make it easier to identify them.
Here I'll name this print greeting.
That value, of course, is up to you though.
Thereafter in a new line
but still belonging to that same dash,
we use the run key to define the command
that should be executed in the command line.
Now as mentioned before,
when defining steps, you can either execute scripts
or commands in the shell
or use predefined actions.
Here when using the run key,
we're doing the former, we are defining a command
that will be executed in the command line.
And here I'll just echo something,
which means I'll output a message in the command line
where I just say Hello World between double quotes.
And then I'll add a second step with a different name,
which is print goodbye, for example,
for this first basic example job,
and here I'll also echo something in the command line
and say done - bye.
And this is now my first basic workflow
with one job with two steps.
And of course, this workflow doesn't do anything meaningful
or useful yet
but we're just getting started here
and you already see the course syntax in action here.